Install documentation (#4)
ale1800/ESP-360-REMOTE: INSTALL.md

# Introduction

> if you know esphome, you can skip most of this document and just use the template in the [ESPHome Configuration](ESPHome Configuration/esp360-default-1.yaml) folder.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you know ESPHome, you can skip most of this document and just use the template in the [ESPHome Configuration](ESPHome Configuration/esp360-default-1.yaml) folder.
```

> if you don't know much about esphome this guide will guide you through the installation process. if you need more information you can head to [Discord](https://discord.gg/PsrK3KDkRy) and if you see something that is not clear enough, do not hesistate to make a pull request and improve the documentation for everybody.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you don't know much about ESPHome this document will guide you through the installation process. If you need more information you can head to [Discord](https://discord.gg/PsrK3KDkRy) and if you see something that is not clear enough, do not hesitate to make a pull request and improve the documentation for everybody.
```

> there are three way to use your device :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are three ways to use your device:
```

> * standalone : good if you plan to setup the device once and forget about it, interract with your device using a webpage

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Standalone: Good if you plan to setup the device once and forget about it, interact with your device using a webpage
```

> * ESPhome : good if you plan to change the configuration often and add more esphome device, interract with your device using a webpage

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* ESPHome: Good if you plan to change the configuration often and add more ESPHome device, interact with your device using a webpage
```

> * home assistant : if you use it aldready, it has a ESPhome plugin and the step are close the the ESPhome one. interract through home assistant

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Home Assistant: If you use it already, it has a ESPHome plugin, and the steps are close the the ESPHome ones.
```

you also need to follow the next step no matter what setup you choose and finnish with the template step.

> # Universal first step

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Universal First Step
```

> for this step you will require a USB-C cable that has power + data (a normal cable should but some cheap aliexpress cable only have the power wire and no data wire) and a computer with chrome or edge browser (no firefox)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For this step you will need a USB-C cable that has power + data (a normal cable should but some cheap cables only have the power wire and no data wire) and a computer with Chrome or Edge browser (no firefox).
```

> open the following [link](https://web.esphome.io/) in your browser once the device is connected to your computer using the USB-C cable

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Open the following [link](https://web.esphome.io/) in your browser once the device is connected to your computer using the USB-C cable
```

> you need to click on "connect"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
then click "connect".
```

![image](https://github.com/nathmo/ESP-360-REMOTE/assets/15912256/d5390c21-c24f-41e1-a038-98f9d171800e)

> and select the USB-Serial device, if no USB serial device appear, ensure your USB cable is good and that you have the CH240X driver (the tool give you the link to install the driver if needed)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the pop-up, select the USB-Serial device. If no USB serial device appears, ensure your USB cable is good and that you have the CH240X driver (the tool gives you the link to install the driver if needed).
```

![image](https://github.com/nathmo/ESP-360-REMOTE/assets/15912256/8a85914c-d865-4ee3-bd17-9f1b856367f2)

> once you are conencted you should be able to click there : 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you are connected click "PREPARE FOR FIRST USE". 
```

![image](https://github.com/nathmo/ESP-360-REMOTE/assets/15912256/2bd723f7-c853-4a67-82dd-09b676650a08)

> the process takes a few minutes and ask for your wifi credentials toward the end so that the device can connect to your network.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The process takes a few minutes and ask for your wifi credentials toward the end so that the ESP 360 Remote can connect to your network.
```

> once it's done you should be able to access the webpage hosted by the ESP 360 Remote

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once completed, access the ESPHome hosted on the ESP 360 Remote.
```

![image](https://github.com/nathmo/ESP-360-REMOTE/assets/15912256/29d30c93-fc50-4dd9-8d0a-e4df338b7313)

> as you can see it's empty. this is only the generic ESPHome configuration. follow to the next section to compile the firmware with the IR, RF and sensors feature

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As you can see it's empty. This is the generic ESPHome configuration. In the next section describes how to compile the firmware with the IR, RF and sensors features.
```

# Standalone

> first follow this guide that will help you install the compiler for the ESPhome firmware

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First follow this guide that will help you install the compiler for the ESPHome firmware.
```

[ESPHome tool desktop installation](https://esphome.io/guides/installing_esphome.html)

> once the tools are installed you can follow this guide to compile the template provided here for your device :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once the tools are installed, follow this guide to compile the template provided here for your device:
```

[ESPHome tool desktop usage](https://esphome.io/guides/getting_started_command_line)

> you can now jump to the template section

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Jump ahead to the template section.
```

> # ESPhome

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# ESPHome
```

> this option require docker but allow you to manage you fleet of esphome device

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This option requires docker but allows you to manage a fleet of ESPHome devices.
```

![image](https://github.com/nathmo/ESP-360-REMOTE/assets/15912256/54c6994f-20ff-47d3-a7e6-2f1cb4a1465a)

> I assume you know the docker basics, here is a docker-compose.yml that you can use to run the ESPhome "fleet manager"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Describing how to use Docker is beyond the scope of this quick install guide. 

Here is an example `docker-compose.yml` that you can use to run the ESPHome "fleet manager".
```

```
version: '3'
services:
  esphome:
    container_name: esphome
    image: ghcr.io/esphome/esphome
    volumes:
      - /path/to/esphome/config:/config
      - /etc/localtime:/etc/localtime:ro
    restart: always
    privileged: true
    network_mode: host
    environment:
      - USERNAME=test
      - PASSWORD=ChangeMe
```

> edit the username + password and the path to your configuration (just an empty folder is good, we will create the file from the web interface)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Edit the username + password and the path to match your configuration (just an empty folder is good, the files will be created from the web interface)
```

> once it's running you can can access it on http://127.0.0.1:6052/

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once running you can can access it at http://127.0.0.1:6052/
```

> from there you can create a new device

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From there you can create a new device.
```

![image](https://github.com/nathmo/ESP-360-REMOTE/assets/15912256/c529b5d6-154f-40f2-a201-60daa0c56e23)

> once done, click on skip for the install and click "edit" instead from the main menu : 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once done, click skip for the install and click "edit" from the main menu: 
```

> remplace the text with the one found in the [ESPHome Configuration](ESPHome Configuration/esp360-default-1.yaml) folder.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the edit window, replace the YAML with the file found in the [ESPHome Configuration](ESPHome Configuration/esp360-default-1.yaml) folder
```

> as explained in the template section of this file

Reviewer: ```suggestion
as explained in the template section of this file,
```

> once happy with your config you can compile by clicking save then come back to the main menu and click the "..." then install

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When completed with your config, compile it by clicking save. 
Then go back to the main menu, click the "..." menu, and then install.
```

![image](https://github.com/nathmo/ESP-360-REMOTE/assets/15912256/d8344466-55ab-4160-86c9-c3f37f18ba89)

> choose manual download

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Choose manual download.
```

![image](https://github.com/nathmo/ESP-360-REMOTE/assets/15912256/e6ae26cc-6eb6-4dc1-970b-3d262d75b06b)

> the file will be compiled to a .bin that you will be able to download. you need to download the legacy format :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Select the "Legacy format". The custom ESPHome image with your configuration will be compiled to a `.bin` file that will download when the build completes. This takes several minutes.

> NOTE: If you are using the Home Assistant Desktop App, but your connection is not secure (using SSL). The file will not download. Do these steps from your Chrome or Edge web browser if you're unsure.
```

![image](https://github.com/nathmo/ESP-360-REMOTE/assets/15912256/dbe9ecfa-dd81-4144-9331-9234900aaab9)

![image](https://github.com/nathmo/ESP-360-REMOTE/assets/15912256/e6f7382d-27fc-405e-8511-8cb5cea83d2e)

> from there, give it a name and choose ESP32

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

This step does not make sense in this flow, it would make sense if you were creating a new ESPHome device in the ESPHome Addon.

![image](https://github.com/nathmo/ESP-360-REMOTE/assets/15912256/8dd688a1-7d29-4f24-bf66-537c23cb7060)

> now return to the webpage of the ESP 360 Remote and under OTA Update browse for the file you previously downloaded and click update

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Return to the webpage of the ESP 360 Remote.
In the OTA Update section, click browse and selet the file you previously downloaded. Click update.
```

> once the device as rebooted, you should see the value from the sensors and your switch

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When completed, the ESP 360 Remote will reboot. In the ESPHome web interfacem, you will now see the values from the sensors in the log on the right-hand side.
```

![image](https://github.com/nathmo/ESP-360-REMOTE/assets/15912256/e66aeed3-7168-4010-b728-6675b3e7b089)

> you are done :)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You are done! :)
```

> # home assistant

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Home Assistant
```

TODO, please write this section if you did it

> # template (universal last step)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Template (universal last step)
```

> here is what the template looks like. you can edit the name field and the wifi ssid + password with your

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is an example template. 
Edit the Name, WIFI SSID, and WIFI Password with your correct values.
```

Is this a "template" or an example ESPHome configuration file?

```
esphome:
  name: esp360-default-1
  friendly_name: ESP360-default-1

esp32:
  board: esp32dev
  framework:
    type: arduino

# Enable logging
logger:

api:
  encryption:
    ...
```
you can add your own action.

> this is an example that send an IR code that turn ON and OFF a fan.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is an example template that sends an IR code to turn a fan on and off.
```

> you will need to adapt the transmit_nec function to your protocol and replace the address and command field accordingly

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You will need to modify the `transmit_nec` function to your protocol and replace the address and command field accordingly.
```

```
  - platform: template
    name: "fan"
    turn_on_action:
      remote_transmitter.transmit_nec:
        transmitter_id: IR_TX
        address: 0xFE01
        command: 0xE21D
    turn_off_action:
      remote_transmitter.transmit_nec:
        transmitter_id: IR_TX
        address: 0xFE01
        command: 0xE21D
```

> if you dont know theses, you can start by compilling the base template and go to the webpage of the ESP 360 remote, you should see a terminal that display the data from the sensors and the IR + RF transceiver

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you dont know those values, you can start by compiling the base template and go to the webpage of the ESP 360 remote. In the log viewer (on the right-hand side) you the data from the sensors and the IR + RF transceiver will be displayed.
```

> just point the remote you want to clone toward the ESP 360  remote and look at the code display in the terminal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Point the remote you want to clone toward the ESP 360 remote, click the buttons(s) you want to clone, and copy the codes displayed in the logs on the right-hand side.
```

> it should looks like something like this :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It will look similar to this:
```

![image](https://github.com/nathmo/ESP-360-REMOTE/assets/15912256/0b4145c7-22b1-4e91-9b0d-4f6a9d262afe)

> the line that we care about is the following

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The line that we care about is:
```

```
Received NEC: address=0xFE01, command=0xE21D
```

> this line give you the protocol (NEC) the address and the command. if you have another protocol lookup in the ESPhome documentation the specific syntax.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is the the protocol (NEC), the address, and the command. If you have another protocol lookup in the ESPHome documentation for the specific syntax.
```

> you can now edit the snippet with your value and add as many as you need for every function you want.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Edit the example template with your value and add as many as you need for every function of your remote you want to clone and use from the ESP 360 Remote.
```

> (dont hesitate to read the ESPhome documentation as it will give you more detailled info and more options to configure your actions)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> TIP: Definitely read the ESPHome documentation as it will give you more detailled information and more options to configure your actions. 
```
